# APS to SQL DW Migration – Data Migration with BCP and SSIS - Export

## Contributors

**Arshad Ali,** Solution Architect

**Kalyan Yella,** Solution Architect

**Vishal Singh**, Consultant

**Basawashree Vasmate**, Consultant

**NOTE** - We have tested these scripts on these two PDW versions, if you are running it on older version than these, you might have to make few changes to make it run there.

Microsoft SQL Server 2012 - 10.0.8015.0 (X64) Jul 5 2016 21:33:16 Copyright (c) Microsoft Corporation Parallel Data Warehouse (64-bit) on Windows NT 6.2 <X64> (Build 9200: )

Microsoft SQL Server 2012 - 10.0.7932.0 (X64) Mar 5 2016 03:17:30 Copyright (c) Microsoft Corporation Parallel Data Warehouse (64-bit) on Windows NT 6.2 <X64> (Build 9200: )

## 1. Introduction
In certain cases when you cannot use Polybase to export the data out from APS, you
can use BCP method. This document talks about the tool which migrates
the data from APS database to the file system using BCP and SSIS (for
parallel exports). The tool generates a folder for each table in the
APS, containing a gzip file having the data of the respective table.

The data export process has these two steps:

1.  **Execute the sql script on the APS database**

    This step creates a table called ‘PartitionInformation’ in the
    database and populates it with all the necessary commands required
    for data migration.

2.  **Run the SSIS Package (Optional)**

    In the second step, SSIS package will fetch the commands from table
    created in step 1 and executes in multiple parallel threads. This
    step is an optional as the commands from the table, created in step
    1, can also be manually executed using command prompt.

<!-- -->

## 2. Data Migration Flow

Based on the type of the source table (whether partitioned or not), the
tool generates output files. For a non-partitioned table, it generates
single file and export all the data from the table in that single file
whereas in case of partitioned table, it generates one file for each
partition of the table and export data from that corresponding partition
of the table. It also uses 7zip utility (that’s a prerequisite if you
want to compress the output files or else comment out that component in
SSIS package) to compress the output files in GZIP archival format,
which is supported when using Polybase to import data into SQL Data
Warehouse. Use of compression, obviously helps in optimizing data
movement and recommended to use it.

![figure1](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/25438079/27756503-fc75361e-5dac-11e7-9588-8d44be946fce.png)
Figure 1 - Data Export with BCP and SSIS

### 2.1 Step 1:

In this step, a table is created and populated as per the below
procedure.

**For Non-Partitioned Tables:**

There will be one row for each non-partitioned table, having below
details

***DBName*** - Database name

***SchemaName*** - schema name

***Tablename*** – Table name

***PartitionNumber*** – 1 (default for non-partitioned table)

***DirCreateCommand*** – it has command to create a Folder with same
name as the Table name at the specified location in the file system.

***BCPCommand*** – it has Command to export table data into a file with
the same name as Table name.

***GZIPCommand*** – it has command to compress the file generated by
executing the command in above step

***DelFileCommand*** –It has command to delete the decompressed file.

**For Partitioned Tables:**

There will be one row for each partition of the table, having below
details

***DBName*** - Database name

***SchemaName*** - schema name

***Tablename*** – Table name

***Type*** – Type of the partition (Left/Right)

***PartitionNumber*** – Partition number

***UpperBoundaryValue*** – UpperBoundaryValue for the partition.

***LowerBoundaryValue –*** LowerBoundaryValue for the partition.

***DirCreateCommand*** – it has command to create a Folder with same
name as the Table name at the specified location in the file system.

***BCPCommand*** – it has Command to export that particular partition
data into a file with the same name as Table name suffixed by
‘\_&lt;UpperBounadryValue&gt;’.

This command uses UpperBoundaryValue, LowerBoundaryValue and Type
columns to filter the table data respective to the defined partition.

***GZIPCommand*** – it has command to compress the file generated by
executing the command in above step

***DelFileCommand*** –It has command to delete the decompressed file.

### 2.2 Step 2:

In this step, you need to execute the SSIS package. Structure of the
package is as below

![figure2](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/25438079/27756514-10a921cc-5dad-11e7-8c1f-fc7db5e713c6.png)

Table in the Step 1 will also have a column ‘SSISLoop’ which is
populated with sequential number for each row, starting from 1 up to a
configurable number (5 or 10) equal to maximum concurrency level in
SSIS.

There are 2 packages to facilitate the parallelism, one will process 5
rows or 5 exports in parallel, and another will process 10 rows or 10
exports in parallel at a time.

As depicted in the picture above,

Loop1 will pick all the rows from the table where SSISLoop column value
= 1

Loop2 will pick all the rows from the table where SSISLoop column value
= 2 and so on

And processed the create directory command, BCP command, GZIP command
and delete file command sequentially from each row.

## 3. Runtime Configuration Parameters

These are some of the important configuration parameters which need to
be defined before execution of the step 1 script, for the tool to
function correctly:

-   **@APSServer:** IP of the APS Appliance

-   **@Username:** User name which will be used to connect APS

-   **@Password:** Password for above user name

-   **@ZIPExePathName:** Zip Exe full Path name

-   **@NoOfConcurrentSSISLoop:** 5 or 10 (to populate SSISLoop column
    and accordingly should choose SSIS package to be executed)

-   **@FilePath:** File Path in which all the folders to be created for
    each table in the APS database.

## 4. Logging and Recovering from Failure

The tool logs execution information in the same table created in Step 1.
It sets a flag ‘IsProcessed’ in the table ‘PartitionInformation’ to 1 on
successful export of the data to file. By default, the value is 0. This
means if the export process fails during execution, the subsequent
execution of the package will pick up the export from the point where it
failed last time – (skipping all those exports which completed
successfully in last attempts).

## 5. References

<https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/sql-server/analytics-platform-system>

<https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/sql-data-warehouse/sql-data-warehouse-overview-what-is>

<https://blogs.msdn.microsoft.com/sqlcat/2017/05/17/azure-sql-data-warehouse-loading-patterns-and-strategies/>

<https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/sql/tools/bcp-utility>
<https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/sql/integration-services/sql-server-integration-services>
